---
layout: post
title: Grinnell Summer Research 2017
tags: [programming]
---

Now that the summer is over and my Fall semester is starting soon, I wanted to give a totally not late and definitely on time writeup on my thoughts and experiences while doing CS research in Grinnell during the summer. If you are considering doing summer research in Grinnell then my hope is that this will help you get a sense of what it's like.

My research was with Charlie Curtsinger working on the Alpaca Validation project, which can theoretically be found [here, but it's not a public repo](https://github.com/grinnell-cs/alpaca-validation). In short, it is a reimplementation of [the original Alpaca project, also in a private repo](https://github.com/grinnell-cs/alpaca), although with the original purpose of simply validating whether Alpaca v1 worked properly. The key idea is to analyze the target function, determine which [assembly instructions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assembly_language) are "significant" and then run the program again with the minimal amount of instructions/energy usage in the target function as possible with the difference being the energy usage. We decided that instructions qualifying as "significant" include setting return values, saving to memory outside the target function's (and its child function calls') stack, and [syscalls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_call). Conceptually, I think it makes a lot of sense and the idea of just categorizing assembly instructions doesn't seem too difficult at first glance, but as with most things involving computers it's much more difficult. In short, the actual mechanisms for setting registers, which are essentially variables at the assembly level, for return values and syscalls can be tricky, especially when you're writing the analyzer program in a language that isn't assembly. Much of the time was spent discovering we needed to support something new and reworking what we had to add in that feature.

My team consisted of two 4th years, Mari and Sara, and the other two teams had 2 first years and 2 second years, Ana, Garrett, Pouya, and Lex, working on Scrambler and one 4th year, Joel, working on his own security-related project. CS is a popular department for research, so most of the professors had research groups and thus the CS floor was relatively lively. The department had weekly presentations where each group (or one of a professor's groups if they had multiple) gave an update on their work since the last meeting in terms simple enough for everyone else, who were all CS students/professors, to understand. Additionally, there were weekly science teas where everyone doing a science department MAP could come get tea and snacks. Sam Rebelsky also had weekly game nights, which I did not go to but heard were fun. Other than these regular events, there were unfortunately not too many scheduled opportunities to hang out with other MAP groups. Aside from the picnic at the beginning of the summer, I never saw anyone doing a non-science MAP nor anyone working any job but mailroom (since I had to get packages a couple times) unless they lived in the same house as me or I specifically met them in my free time.

Speaking of which, I chose to live on campus in Art House (the one across from JCC). The "on campus" designation is slightly confusing, but it means the house is college owned, like one of the language houses, but not one of the dorms, which are periodically rented and used by outside groups. I was able to live with a couple of my friends, Victor and Kat, and the rest of the house was other MAP students. Art House turned out to be possibly the best house I could've lived in, at least in terms of the building itself. It had a great combination of ammenities and location: it had AC, which only one other on campus house and only a couple off campus houses had; it was hygenic and had a nice living space; the location was right between town and campus, which meant it wasn't too far to get groceries from Fareway nor too far from where I had to go every day for research; a lot of supplies lived in the house, including two large refrigerators and a ton of utensils; FM came through multiple times a week to clean; and the college was in charge of it, so when the oven and microwave broke we got a new one within a couple days. I'm fairly certain it was also cheaper than most off campus houses, but don't quote me on it.

The community is usually quite different during the summer, considering only a fraction of the population stays, although it can depend on how many friends also stay around. I was able to get closer with and make a few new friends who I had never been able to see much during the school year. Unsurprisingly, the campus is really boring during the summer, so having people to hang out with is healthy for your sanity. However, given my introverted nature I also spent a lot of time watching shows or playing video games, which I think is also a valid way to spend your high amounts of free time.

As for the research itself, it was more intensive than the internships I've done but also more fun and at times laidback if that contradiction makes any sense. The work itself was rather high level since we were working on very low level technology (ayy), but Charlie was a wonderful advisor and let us relax as much as we needed to and then some. He was also kind enough to take us out to lunch once every week, utilizing the rather generous CS research budget. I got to work closely with my team members, butt heads on our varying ideas, and deal with some successes and many more failures along the way, which was a genuinely pleasureable but challenging experience. Thankfully, our project worked mostly in the end; there are some pieces missing and it's not ready for publishing yet, but it's quite close and I would be happy to help whoever comes along next to pick up where we left off. Charlie also did a good job preparing us in the semester leading up to the research as well as during the summer explaining things we hadn't seen before or didn't grasp conceptually. He also adopted an adorable 10 year old cairn doggo that he brought in whenever he could, although she suffered a bit from allergies and general health problems due to her old age.

Overall, I would say it was a great experience. I've had the opportunity to do a couple internships in the past, so research was a nice change of pace and allowed me to get to know a few members of my major better. The work really was satisfying, and the frequent frustrations were offset by whenever we worked our way through something. There's no meal plan during the summer and going to restaurants every day is obviously a bad idea, so I had to learn to cook somewhat. I'm still pretty bad at it and primarily just made pasta, ramen, and chicken in a specific way (shoutouts to Victor and Kat for occasionally being helpful), but it was enough to get me through the summer in conjunction with the grill, which was open for lunch. My housemates, luckily enough, were great and we had a lot of fun together, which minimized some of the boring parts of summer. If you have the chance to do a MAP, particularly a CS MAP, I would highly recommend it as long as you feel confident you can find ways to pass the time.

Here are a few tips that can make your life a bit easier, some of which may be more obvious than others:

* Get a vehicle, mainly to get to Fareway for groceries and whatever building your MAP is in. A bike is your easiest and cheapest option, especially since graduating seniors tend to sell their old bikes, but a car is always amazing. If you don't have a car, get a friend who has a car so that you can escape to Des Moines, Iowa City, or even Chicago for food and just a breath of fresh, civilized air. Also useful for transporting things to and from storage.

* Going to the gym is a very effective and productive hobby during the summer. I won't pretend I had the willpower to go, but it's certainly a good way to avoid being a sloth and get some gains for when everyone else gets back on campus ;)

* A great way to meet with friends is to have potlucks. Everyone likes food, especially free food, and it's a nice excuse to hang out together and exchange cooking notes.

* Don't get too much food. This is especially true in houses with many people since you run out of space quite quickly, but you may be surprised by how far a loaf of bread or a couple boxes of pasta can go. There generally isn't anyone else to eat your food since everyone else has their own, so things might spoil or go bad before you actually finish them.

* Only unpack as much as you need. This may just sound like pure laziness, but it's actually a pretty good idea. During the school year you may have friends over and you might need less clutter to get work done, but during the summer you typically only burn time/sleep in your room. Plus, you're only there for the three or so months that you do research, so you'll be leaving sooner and thus leaving more things packed means having less work later.

* The farmer's market, which occurs weekly on Thursdays and briefly on Saturdays, is a great place to get sweets from and fresh vegetables if you want it, but otherwise you're best sticking to Fareway or Walmart for cheap ingredients.

Feel free to contact me if you have any questions, either about research itself, living in Grinnell for the summer, or our research project!